In this lesson what we're gonna do is we're
gonna discuss three different global entities
that we can use to better understand
global economics and interest rates.
So we're gonna talk about one,
the International Money Fund,
the second one is the World Bank,
and the third one is the World Trade Organization.
So why are we discussing these three entities?
Because they're a great source of country
and regional research that we can do before considering
buying bonds or other investments in other countries.
Now the IMF, which is also called
the International Monetary Fund, was created in 1944
with the intention of making sure that the Great Depression
of the 1930s never occurs again, as it almost did in 2008.
And later in the course I'm gonna explain what really
happened in 2008, because as personal investors
trying to save, protect, and make more money,
we have to understand what really happened,
so we are protected and somewhat insulated
when it comes to our net worth and when it comes
to our investment diversification strategies.
Now the IMF has a 189 member countries,
and the IMF's parent organization is the United Nations,
and the IMF's goal is to make sure that the global economy
is growing, meaning GDP is growing;
while trying to minimize poverty and helping
to facilitate international trade at the same time.
The IMF doesn't just give advice to countries,
it can actually lend money to countries too
that are experiencing balance of payments problems,
meaning they owe more than what they have.
And when oil prices are high it can have
a material negative impact on the global economy.
You know in the 1970's there were was a spike
in the price of oils which really hurt many countries.
As such, the IMF actually lent money
to countries that were hurt by the spike in oil.
And when I worked on Wall Street and in the hedge fund
industry we monitored the price of oil very closely,
as changes in oil prices has a huge impact
on most companies in the world, and not just companies
that benefit from higher oil prices, like oil companies
such as, Petrobras in Brazil, or Exxon in America,
but oil prices actually impact construction and material
companies significantly, like cement giant Cemex in Mexico,
or construction equipment company Komatsu in Japan,
and its biggest rival Caterpillar in the United States.
Interestingly enough, I actually ran a regression
or a correlation analysis when I worked at a big hedge fund
and we discovered that the price of oil materially impacted
the share price of German software giant SAP,
French video game company Ubisoft,
and of course American solar company First Solar.
And so changes in the prices of many commodities
affects almost all companies in the world
regardless of what industry they're in.
As a result, we as personal investors
must understand the macroeconomic implications
of price changes in commodities.
For example, if the price of gold goes up a lot,
it can be seen as what's called a flight
to quality investment or a fear investor indicator,
and we're gonna talk more about commodities and how
to invest in commodities a little bit later in the course.
Okay let's go back to the IMF.
In the 1990s as Communist countries moved towards capitalism
the IMF had to lend an enormous amount of money
to countries in places like Eastern Europe.
Also in the early 2000's the IMF lent a lot of money
to countries affected by the Latin American debt crisis,
and of course IMF lending rose a lot in 2008
when the entire world was literally,
literally within 24 hours of bank machines not working.
Those were tough times and since you might one day
consider investing in stocks or bonds
from a particular country, let's take a look
at the global economy's total revenue,
meaning GDP, which stands for Gross Domestic Product.
Then what we'll do is we're gonna drill down
and look at individual country revenue,
meaning individual company GDP,
again GDP stands for Gross Domestic Product
and measures how much money a country makes,
not excluding expenses, and so if a company makes
more money than it spends then it has a surplus.
And if a country makes less money
than it spends then it has a deficit.
So if America, for example, has a large deficit,
then who owns America's debt, meaning their bonds?
Well countries like China own a lot of it
and so do big investment firms in the form
of bonds which we will cover in a lot of detail shortly.
The global economy is so interconnected that when one
large country sneezes, it impacts anybody that has
or wants to get a mortgage to buy their home.
And there's a wealth of information that is awesome
at www.imf.org, and so please bookmark this webpage
and read the contents if you are considering
investing in a country outside of your own,
or if you want to better understand certain regions
in the world and how the global economy's actually doing.
The data here at the IMF's website is unbiased
and it really helps us understand how the world works,
so we can be more informed investors.
Okay, let's talk quickly about the business cycle.
Business is cyclical and the economic cycles can last
for years; so why is it important for me to mention this?
Because we have to understand where we are in, in terms
of the economic cycle when analyzing the prospects
of a particular company or country,
especially if we think interest rates will rise,
which means leaving more money in the bank,
makes sense right, if interest rates go up?
And this will all make much more sense to you very soon,
you'll have this aha moment.
So when the economy and the stock market are doing well
we usually refer to this as a bull market.
Conversely, when the stock market and the economy are not
doing well we usually refer to this as a bear market.
And sometimes the stock market recovers ahead
of a recovery in the economy as investors that buy stocks
usually anticipate what is going to happen,
which is somewhat priced into stocks.
And the value of stocks today reflects what investors
expect these stocks to earn in the future.
So how do we know if we are in a recession?
Meaning a bad economic environment.
We know if we're in a recession because a recession
is defined as having at least two consecutive quarters
of negative, your real growth in GDP.
Okay, now we know that a great personal investor
always does their own research and never relies
on people on TV that sound confident.
Don't let anybody bias your opinion in finance.
Always go right to the data source
and do your own homework, you know just like how we like
to personally buy wholesale, as it's cheaper
than buying retail, we also wanna go right to the source
when we do our research on potential investments,
instead of listening to the self-proclaimed
and biased pundits or experts,
whatever you call them on financial TV stations.
People on TV are often biased and are often talking
about certain stocks because they own
them or they work at that company.
And so when economic statistics are released
and the media is interpreting it,
I don't want you to take their word for it.
What I want you to do is I want you to go right
to the source of the data and read it yourself,
as the best investors do their own research,
or else you basically become a victim
of what's called groupthink, and if everybody else
has the same opinion on a stock and everyone else owns it,
then there aren't that many incremental buyers.
So go to the economic websites, like the imf.org,
or the government website in your country
and drill down and understand why economic
statistics are going up or down.
And you'll find that once you do all of your own research,
you'll be a better investor than anybody you know,
and you won't panic when a stock falls that you own,
you'll just think, okay I don't know the path but I know
the destination and it's much higher for this stock,
and you might even buy more when
it goes down for ridiculous reasons.
Okay cool, we are now done learning about the IMF.
Okay so the bottom line is that one of the primary purposes
of the IMF is to make sure that the world's revenue,
meaning GDP is growing, and you can track this at imf.org,
and the IMF as we know spends a lot
of time focused on global GDP growth.
Okay moving on, the World Bank on the other hand
is more focused on decreasing poverty in the world
and my god, thank you Bill Gates, Bob Geldof,
and so many other incredible humanitarians,
per this video here you can see now that global poverty
is down materially since the 1980s.
Isn't that incredible?
Check this out, over 40% of the people in the world
in the early 1980s lived in extreme poverty,
meaning they made less than $1.90 per day.
Today that figure is close to 10%.
So, so many financial journalists on TV are so negative,
you know the sky is falling, the sky is falling, whatever,
and there are certainly a lot of things to be positive about
and I don't recommend watching financial news programs;
you'll be a much better investor if you
ignore them and do your own research.
Okay, like the IMF, the World Bank was also founded in 1944,
and I mention the World Bank because it is another
unbelievable unbiased source of global economic data
for you to consider reading as you
consider investing internationally.
Now if we go together to data.worldbank.org, you will see
that we can search for GDP per capita,
which means how much revenue does a country make per person,
and so the average person made about $450 annually
in revenue in the early 1960s,
and now that number is more than $10,000.
Again this is revenue, meaning
that expenses are not included.
Now let's scroll in more, if we take a closer look
at GDP per capita per country, you can see
that similar to the IMF website, you can visualize data
on a country by country basis here as well.
So now let's discuss the World Trade Organization.
Okay, this is the third one we're looking at,
the third global entity, the WTO's primary goals are
to make sure that trading levels take place
between countries and that trading disputes are settled.
The WTO was founded in 1995, it's pretty new actually,
and it's based in Switzerland.
So if we go to wto.org, we see that there
are over 160 members in the WTO, and you can click
on any country and learn a lot about
that country's trading characteristics, if you want to.
So if we click on Canada, that's my country
of origin I represent here, we can see
that you can also look at GDP statistics here.
And I won't go into too much detail here
as we already covered GDP earlier,
but here you can learn more about the Canadian economy,
their trading partners, their trading disputes, et cetera.
And if you have a business trade issue or any issue
that you wanna resolve involving your company,
just contact your local elected government official.
You know it might be a congressperson,
or a member of Parliament, but just keep
in mind that they work for you.
They work for the public as you elected them.
So call them if you need help with your business
when it comes to international trading or other issues that
might help your company grow and hence hire more people.
Again, they work for you as you elected them, so call them
and ask because you know what?
Most people never ever do this
and you've got nothing to lose and everything to gain.